also in the news recently was the close
flyby of the sun of the Parker solar
probe so I thought I'd take a little
look at what's been going on
there the Parker solar probe was
launched in 2018 just before the whole
covid business kicked off and was sent
to observe the Sun and in particular the
solar Corona the Sun outer atmosphere
revealed in the picture on the left
there where we have a total eclipse of
the Sun going on and the moon is
blotting out the bright disc of the Sun
revealing that active outer atmosphere
the very hot outer thin gas surrounding
the Sun the Corona and when I say hot
we're talking a million degrees um
Kelvin Centigrade makes no difference a
million degrees so much hotter than the
surface of the sun which is only 5,800
de C and has always been a mystery as to
why the corona was getting as hot how
could it possibly be being heated this
much well the Parker solar probe was
sent to find out it was launched in 2018
and it traveled a very complicated
process using the slingshot gravity of
the planet
Venus to alter its orbit
so it flew from Earth in towards the
solar center of the solar system past
the inner planets and then these close
encounters with Venus were used to set
it on a
course in towards the
sun um it it's been traveling the
fastest of any probe that we've ever
launched as a result of this dive this
near suicidal dive in towards the center
there um 4
130,000 mil hour is the uh relative
speed to the earth a terrific speed
still only
0.064% the speed of light but
nevertheless it's the fastest that
mankind has ever
achieved it took this Photograph during
its 2020 flyby of Venus um it's quite
impressive whizzes whizzing past the
planet at high speed it's caught this uh
rather Moody look of uh
uh the planet there and perhaps even
seen down to Aphrodite Tera one of the
large pseudo continents that are on the
surface of
Venus um in the process of doing so it's
been able to correct its orbit and get
very close to the Sun and what's caused
all of the interest just at the moment
is the close flyby the first very close
dive towards the sun on Christmas Eve
24th December
2024 it went just 3.8 million miles
above the surface of the Sun now the sun
is a million miles in diameter so this
is
close um we couldn't communicate with it
at that distance against the all the
radiation coming from the sun we had to
wait until its elliptical orbit carried
it out the far side and Away to be able
to pick up the signal and it was 2 days
later on in day 26th of December that
radio signs revealed it has survived
because there you know this environment
that it's diving into is incredibly
harsh fortunately they then received all
of the uh expected data and Telemetry
information back via the radio and
that's now all in the hands of
scientists it arrived on New Year's Day
on the 1 of January for the final stages
of that now to do this the probe needed
to be able to survive a terrific amount
of heat the first idea for producing a
su
Grazer probe goes back to
1958 so this idea had been around for a
long time but technology was needed to
evolve so that it was possible to do
this produce a probe that could have
instruments that would work and that it
would survive going that close to the
the sun I put a picture on the right
which shows how the Sun looks to us just
half a degree across in the sky hence
the uh fact that the moon and the sun
half a degree in apparent size each
produce those solar eclipses that let us
see the Corona in the first place but
from the close approach of the Parker
solar probe the sun would appear to
cover 14° of Sky that's 28 time time the
angular size and 28 squar times the
amount of energy coming towards you from
that larger dis uh so in fact the probe
is receiving over 500 times the amount
of heat energy compared uh with the same
size object at the distance of the Earth
so per square
meter and this would fry it in a matter
of seconds if it was not
protected and the protection is provided
by a large 2.3 M diameter composite
carbon Shield uh blocking the light from
the sun and then a secondary cooling
system with pumped fluid and it manages
to keep the probe down to just 29 degre
c
um amazing because the shield is at
1,370 degrees C on the Sunwood side so
this is and a very amazing technological
achievement now the big discovery that
uh is the one that we were all looking
for is Illustrated in this animation
here this is called switchbacks These
are disturbances in the sun's magnetic
field these uh
moving Wiggles where the sun's magnetic
field reverses on itself uh and turn
changes Direction back and forth and
these Wiggles can move very fast 300,000
miles an
hour along the magnetic field lines and
the magnetic field lines are carrying
with them beams of electrons emitted by
the Sun the electrons are boiled away
from their atoms the sun's not really a
gas it's a plasma all the electrons have
been stripped from the atoms and they
get C caught up in the
uh magnetic field and they spiral around
the magnetic field lines and then these
switchbacks flick through the clouds of
electrons and whip them up into high
energy beams and we think that this is
why the corona is so hot it's these
beams of electrons crashing into the
atoms of the sun's atmosphere carrying
this enormous amount of energy that's
been whipped into them by by these
switchbacks in the magnetic field that
is causing all of that million degree
temperature so what else have we found
well we've also found that there is no
dust in a region near to the sun perhaps
not a total surprise but interesting
nevertheless the whole region around the
Sun is so hot that it's presumably
vaporized and destroyed all of the
cosmic dust in the that might be
otherwise in a cloud around the star
there and we've also in
2022 discovered a comet direct with the
Parker solar probe so it's named after
it and since then 19 more of these Su
Grazer comets that are sweeping past the
sun very very close in have been found
so it's amazing what it's discovered it
certainly solved this one major problem
of the heating of the sun Sun's Corona
and uh that we had a suspicion that that
was all driven by these magnetic fields
but discovered a number of other
interesting and important facts about
the solar system and the Sun as well and
I'm sure that it will do more work there
are more of these close flybys planned
there's another 23 of them yet to come
so maybe more news on this later in the
meantime thanks very much for listening
and I'll bring it to a close there